---
layout: post
title:  Traveling Far
date:   2018-08-29 10:00:00 -0600
author: Caitlin Hewitt
comments: true
title-image: /assets/img/traveling-far/imogene-pass.jpg
---

I distinctly remember when I first realized I could ride my bicycle to the
Speedy’s gas station and convenience store about a mile from my house in
Greensburg, Pennsylvania.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/caitlin-walking.jpg"
       alt="Caitlin in a rare moment off the bike">
</div>

I was somewhere around eight years old. I was elated when it occurred to me
that I could go there and buy a slurpee on a hot summer day all by myself.
“Freedom!” I thought. Growing up in rural southwestern Pennsylvania, I was
pretty dependent on a vehicle, so realizing I could get myself anywhere on my
own felt liberating. (Little did I know that many years later, I would
sometimes even more eagerly anticipate a convenience store and maybe even a
slurpee after miles of empty road.)

Fast forward a couple decades and I moved to Venice in Los Angeles, California.
The setting looked quite different, but I had a similar revelation. Most people
I know hate Los Angeles because of the traffic, but I discovered a clever
workaround. I would just live by the beach in a trendy neighborhood and bicycle
the seven miles inland to my office tower in Westwood. I loved speeding by the
traffic in the perfect 70 degree weather, and I loved Los Angeles. My bicycle
gave me a better Los Angeles. A few years later and back in San Francisco, one
of my favorite things to do on a Saturday was to bike a 90-mile loop out to
Point Reyes and back. On my way back across the Golden Gate Bridge, I would
pass all the other city residents on their way home from the same day trip
waiting in an endless line of cars to cross the bridge. Meanwhile, I was still
fully enjoying the marine breeze, the perfect light of the setting sun, and the
iconic bridge view.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/caitlin-singletrack.jpg"
       alt="Rocky Mountain singletrack">
</div>

In the last two months, I have biked over 4,700 miles across Alaska, Canada,
Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, Colorado, and a little bit of Utah. At first, we were
hesitant to take detours from our route. Thirty miles in the wrong direction to
see a world famous glacier in Stewart, Alaska felt like too far on a bicycle.
But a month into our year-long adventure, we woke up in a bed (on a rare night
inside) in Canmore, Alberta, Canada realizing we had biked 2,500 miles without
a single day fully off the bike. At that rate, we’d be in Argentina in seven
months. While we already had a pretty indirect path to Argentina, it felt great
to realize we had banked so much extra time for detours and days off. That
meant more time in scenic mountain towns, at friends’ homes, and in places we
can experience new cultures. This was similarly liberating and at least as
exciting as realizing I could get a Slurpee at Speedy’s on my own. I could get
anywhere on my own.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/frisco-photoshoot.jpg"
       alt="Posing for a photoshoot in Frisco, CO">
</div>

This was the point at which we decided to take a few hundred mile detour to
Stanley, Idaho to visit the Cassidys, some dear friends who have a beautiful
home on the bank of the Salmon River with a spectacular view of the Sawtooth
Mountains. The Sawtooth Mountains present one of my favorite views in the
United States, a picture perfect craggy mountain ridge with pockets of snow
with the backdrop of a deep blue sky. This spot where we witnessed totality
during the 2017 solar eclipse, and the 360 degree sunset/ sunrise had me
spinning in circles trying to take in the pastel paradise around me. Two days
in a row, we crawled up 5,000 foot gravel climbs through the wild and remote
Bitterroot Forest to get there. But arriving by bike on a long journey to a
special and familiar place is a unique treat. We took our longest break yet and
recovered with a daily routine of taking stand-up-paddle boards or duckies down
the river to the hot springs where we’d soak and sip beer.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/stanley-mountains.jpg"
       alt="Relaxing in Stanley, ID">
</div>

While in Stanley, I spent some time at the library planning our route through
the rest of the United States. Desktop computers make this task much easier
than the iPad we are carrying, so public libraries are a great resource. We
already knew we would venture back towards the Great Divide Mountain Bike Route
from our Idaho detour, but we wanted to cut off from there somewhere to head
west towards San Diego and then Baja California, Mexico. Looking at a map with
the knowledge that I could cross a state in under a week, I truly felt like I
could travel anywhere. Most would think that non-motorized travel would hold
you back, but I had never before felt like traveling somewhere I wanted to go
was this simple. The magic was a combination of an excess of time and a little
effort (okay, sometimes a big effort). This made route planning a joyous task,
aside from the painfully slow WiFi connection. Just think how you would feel if
you could check off many items on your travel bucket list in the very near
future. I looked at a map of Colorado and started pinning mountains towns that
I have loved in the past or had wanted to check out: Steamboat Springs, Frisco,
Leadville, Aspen, Carbondale, Crested Butte, Ouray, Telluride. Then I dragged
around GPX tracks in my route planning tools (Ride with GPS and Google Maps) in
search of little back roads that would connect these places and hopefully avoid
cars. That’s how we found ourselves on some big, rough mountain passes
including Pearl and Imogene.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/cloudy-pass.jpg"
       alt="Approaching Pearl Pass">
</div>

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/pearl-pass.jpg"
       alt="The top of Pearl Pass">
</div>

It’s not just the miles we cover but really the way that we cover those miles
that makes bike traveling such a rich and memorable experience. I was delighted
when I discovered Imogene Pass Road while messing around with my route planning
tools. It presented a straight shot—okay squiggly straight—between Ouray and
Telluride. I had remembered hearing that there was only one way into the box
canyon that contains Telluride. “Aha!” I thought. It was a secret back way
accessible only to jeeps and adventurous cyclists who don’t mind a bit of
hike-a-bike. Imogene Pass is the second highest “road” in Colorado and pretty
high on the list for North America too. It’s a rugged Jeep trail, with grades
in excess of 30%, that climbs up to 13,114 feet. The trail gains 4,350 feet in
about eight miles. For our loaded bike rigs, this meant quite a bit of hopping
off our bikes and pushing. There were several times when I would shove my bike
forward with great effort, hold the brakes so the bike wouldn’t slide back down
the hill, step my feet forward, and then start the multi-step routine again.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/caitlin-rainy-pass.jpg"
       alt="Caitlin in full rain gear">
</div>

Despite the many hours it took us to get up to the top of this pass, I didn’t
regret selecting such an impossibly hard route. I had time to spare, and this
is just how I wanted to spend it. The views were spectacular, the crisp
mountain air was invigorating, and I received tons of encouragement from the
incredulous Jeep drivers who had never before seen bicycles on that road. I
felt the most accomplished I have on this trip when I arrived at the worn-down
wooden sign that marked the top of that pass. Tired from the effort and oxygen
deprivation, I still climbed on top of a little post to take a photo in a
victory pose with a big grin on my swollen face. That’s the only time on this
trip I’ve felt the need to commemorate and celebrate an effort quite like that.
When you ride as much as we have been, it becomes hard to replicate the feeling
I used to get from a really challenging ride. It’s a feeling of totally
destroying your body where you somehow feel weak from the effort in a good way.
If you’ve never experienced this, I have no hope of describing it in writing. I
used to get this feeling from my Point Reyes loop or riding a century in a day.
Maybe it’s endorphins, maybe it’s the relief of completing the struggle, or
maybe it’s just feeling like I earned my beer and tacos in Telluride. I didn’t
know until completing Imogene Pass, but I had missed that feeling.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/caitlin-imogene-pass.jpg"
       alt="Caitlin in her victory pose on Imogene Pass">
</div>

About an hour before reaching the top of Imogene pass, I spotted a mountain
lion about 50 meters from me. I have always wanted to see this elusive animal,
and it was bound to happen given all the hours I’m spending outside in their
territory on my quiet bicycle. This was a perfect sighting. The animal trotted
mostly away from me—tail raised high to give me an unmistakable signal that
this was indeed a lion. At the same time, I thankfully noticed a Jeep a couple
switchbacks beneath me that presented some amount of safety for me. But at that
very moment, I was on my own to appreciate the adrenaline and beauty of a rare
wildlife encounter. Had I been climbing in a Jeep, that lion would have heard
me coming long before and run off without giving me the slightest clue of its
presence.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/imogene-pass.jpg"
       alt="Descending from Imogene Pass">
</div>

At so many stages of my life, my bicycle has given me a different—and I think
fuller—perspective of the world including showing me the best side of people.
We have received so much help and encouragement of all sorts from people we
have met along the way. If you are following our live location,[1] you probably
noticed we were stuck in Bland(ing), Utah (parenthesis added) for a few days.
Devon caught some sort of bug that he can’t seem to kick. We needed to be
considerably more cautious than normal in departing Blanding because the next
90 miles of riding were through a desert with no services, no water sources,
and no shade. Then we’d find a convenience store and Lake Powell and go another
80 miles with no services, no water sources, and no shade. It was not the most
appealing prospect to someone feeling awful even in an air conditioned room
with a bathroom.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/pops-burritos-blanding.jpg"
       alt="Pop's Burritos in Blanding, UT">
</div>

There’s not much in Blanding, and it’s not exactly where I would have chosen to
spend a few days. (I’ve been kicking myself for not making Devon rest in
Telluride when he was starting to feel sick.) The best thing I found in
Blanding was a cute little roadside place called Pop’s Burritos, and Pop was
extremely generous in trying to help us out. He treated us to burritos and
insisted that we take his phone number and call him for a rescue by truck if
Devon felt ill again once we hit the road. While Devon was resting and I was
making friends with every single person in and passing through Blanding, I met
some hippies traveling by antique motorcycle who insisted I take the last of
their liquid colloidal minerals to help Devon recover. As I said, we receive
generous help of all sorts. (Devon may or may not have refused the colloidal
minerals when I brought them back to him.) Our final and extremely generous
help in Blanding came from a friend who frequently flies around the southwest
with his own bikes in his Cessna. After learning of Devon’s illness and the
predicament it put us in for keeping plans to celebrate Devon’s birthday with
friends in a favorite spot outside Zion, he offered a quick plane hop across
Utah. This put Devon in a much better spot for recovery and rescued me from
Blanding boredom. (We plan to return to Blanding and pick up where we left off
early next week. You can’t bike from Alaska to Argentina without Utah!)

I expect we have only had the teeniest taste so far of how richly we can
experience the world by choosing human-power over gasoline, and I can’t wait to
get to Central and South America where there will be more potential for new
cultural experiences. I can’t come up with a better way to sum up how I feel
about this than what I read on a sticker at The Adventure Cycling Association
[2] headquarters in Missoula, Montana. Bike travel takes you farther.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/traveling-far/colorado-trail.jpg"
       alt="Colorado Trail">
</div>

[1] If you’d like to follow our live location, just shoot us a message via the
contact form, and we can give you the password. We just have this filter, so we
don’t get spam messages over our satellite device because we are charged by the
message.

[2] The Adventure Cycling Association is a non-profit that maps long distance
U.S. bike routes including the Great Divide Mountain Bike Route.
