---
layout: post
title:  Mid-trip Gear Review Part 1 - Clothing and Camping
date:   2019-03-01 10:00:00 -0600
author: Devon Proctor
comments: true
title-image: /assets/img/gear-review/stove-flip.jpg
---

<style>
.item {
  border: 1.5px solid black;
  padding-left: 2px;
  padding-right: 2px;
}
.good {
  background: lightgreen;
}
.bad {
  background: pink;
}
.neutral {
  background-color: lightgray;
}
.new {
  background-image: url({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/plus.svg);
  background-size: 20px 20px;
  background-position: left center;
  background-repeat: no-repeat;
  padding-left: 20px;
}
.dropped {
  background-image: url({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/minus.svg);
  background-size: 20px 20px;
  background-position: left center;
  background-repeat: no-repeat;
  padding-left: 20px;
}
</style>

Finally, after eight months, Iâ€™m ready to pack.

It has taken days of being soaked to the bone through a softshell rain jacket,
countless warranty replacements, endless frustration with crippled mobile
websites and other such hard earned knowledge to finally have a set of gear that
I feel good about. While this post won't be the most interesting for everyone
following along from home, I hope that anyone planning a similar trip can
benefit from the strong opinions I've developed about every last thing I've
carried across more than seventy lines of latitude.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/devon-gear-small.jpg"
       alt="Devon's initial gear setup">
</div>

While I've swapped out a few items that didn't hold up and dropped a few more
that proved unnecessary, I'm still carrying largely the same gear with which I set
out from Alaska. While everyone's initial reaction is amazement at how little
we're carrying, we've found our setup to provide us with everything we need to
be comfortable on the road. By carrying roughly half the weight in gear of many
cycle tourists in bikepacking bags that are much more aerodynamic than the
traditional rack and panniers, we're able to cover more miles every day and
tackle more challenging trails.

This is the first of a three part gear review, covering clothing and camping
gear. Follow-up posts will discuss bike gear and digital paraphernalia.

I've marked each item as either being a <span class="item good"> strong
recommendation</span>, <span class="item neutral">neutral</span>, or <span
class="item bad">something to avoid</span>. Also, I've marked <span class="item
dropped">items that I started with but dropped</span> and have <span
class="item new">picked up along the way</span>.

If you have any questions about what we're carrying (or aren't) please leave a
comment at the bottom of the post -- I hope it will be helpful for you or anyone
else packing for an adventure!

- Table of Contents
{:toc}

# Clothing

## Shirt

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/shirt.jpg"
       alt="Icebreaker Merino wool tee">
</div>

I've worn a lightweight, Merino wool  <a class="item good"
href="https://www.icebreaker.com/en/mens-tops/tech-lite-short-sleeve-crewe/103860.html">
Icebreaker t-shirt</a> every day for the past eight months. A high quality
Merino wool shirt is a must, for its durability, odor resistance (just ask
Caitlin!), warmth when wet, comfort and sun protection. It doesn't dry as fast
as many synthetics, but it's actually very nice to soak it through to cool off
while riding under the blazing desert sun. I began the trip with a second,
similar <a class="item neutral dropped"
href="https://www.icebreaker.com/en/mens-tops/-tabi-tech-lite-long-sleeve-pocket-crewe/104228.html">Icebreaker
long sleeve shirt</a> but quickly learned that a second t-shirt wasn't a luxury
that was important to me. Icebreaker agreed to replace my shirt, as so many
pulls developed in the fabric after five months of hard use. Both the original
and replacement shirts faded significantly from dark navy blue to a pale ghostly
shade on the back. Despite the varied abuse I've subjected my shirt to, it still
looks smart enough off the bike that I'm often told (complemented?) that I don't
have the long distance bike tourist "look." An important part of avoiding the
look of someone living off their bicycle is to regularly wash your clothes. For
us, this almost exclusively means hand washing with soap in the sink. Without a
change of clothes and lots of slow-drying wool, this means that I'll often wear
a wet shirt after washing if it's hot, or just go shirtless under my jacket when
it's cold.

## Underwear

Similarly, my <a class="item good"
href="https://www.icebreaker.com/en/mens-underwear/anatomica-boxers-with-fly/103030.html">Icebreaker
boxers</a> translate all the benefits of a Merino wool shirt to more delicate
regions.  These are super comfortable and sturdy, and they're wonderful to slip
on at night as relief from long days in a chamois. They resist odor well enough
to survive between infrequent bathroom sink washings without causing excessive
offense. I'm carrying a pair of <a class="item neutral"
href="https://www.patagonia.com/product/mens-capilene-midweight-bottoms/44486.html?dwvar_44486_color=NVYB&cgid=mens-baselayers#tile-5=&start=1&sz=24">Patagonia
long underwear</a> that I wear on some nights and particularly cold days.

## Bike shorts

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/bibs-profile.jpg"
       alt="Rapha Classic Bib Shorts">
</div>

A pair of bib shorts with a high quality chamois is one of the most important
investments for a long bike tour, as it will minimize chafing and other
unpleasantness. The pair of bib shorts I started the trip with finally gave out
in Mexico, and I upgraded to a pair of <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.rapha.cc/gb/en/shop/classic-bib-shorts-ii/product/BSS02XX">Rapha
classic bib shorts</a> They are very well constructed, fit me well and have a
wonderfully thick, durable and comfortable chamois. They have shown very little
signs of wear over three months of constant use. They have an easy to reach
rear pocket that's perfect for stashing a phone or wallet when I hop off my bike
during the day.

## Shorts

While I'm wearing my bib shorts almost always when I'm on my bike, it's nice to
occasionally change into something that doesn't immediately identify you as
being more comfortable planted on a small, hard piece of plastic than anywhere
else. Caitlin gave me for my birthday a pair of <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.kitsbow.com/collections/mens-collection/products/masterlink-short">Kitsbow
Masterlink shorts</a> which are designed as performance mountain bike shorts but
still look sharp off the bike. Like everything from Kitsbow, they are very well
made. Its integrated belt keeps them in place whether I'm swimming under a
waterfall, ripping down rocky singletrack, or running around in a pick-up soccer
game. All of the pockets are zippered, making pickpockets less of a concern in
bustling Latin American cities. These replaced a pair of lighter weight <a
class="item bad dropped" href="https://global.prana.com/mojo-short.html">Prana
Mojo shorts</a> which wore though in multiple places and generally looked out of
place in a nice restaurant.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/climbing-shorts.jpg"
       alt="Kitsbow Masterlink shorts">
</div>

## Socks

The right pair of socks for the conditions can make the difference between your
feet being comfortable and either a soupy, boiling mess on a hot day or a numb
block of ice after a day of riding at 12,000 ft in a mix of rain and hail.  Once
again, Merino wool is the way to go. From their own extensive adventures,
Caitlin's parents Tim and Loreen really know their socks, and gave me for
Christmas this year a pair of <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.kitsbow.com/collections/trail-collection/products/merino-rockwork-sock-6">Kitsbow
wool socks</a> and comfortable <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.showerspass.com/products/crosspoint-waterproof-crew-socks">Showers
Pass waterproof socks.</a> The Kitsbow socks are my everyday pair, are breathable
and comfortable for anything from chilly, dry days in the 40's to days when the
temperature climbs into the low 90's. I put on the waterproof socks for
protracted rainstorms or when the temperature turns truly frigid. These have
kept my feet comfortable through even the nastiest weather we've encountered. At
this point, we're past the equator and have left the hottest weather behind, but
when the temperature would regularly top 100 degrees I was carrying a
lightweight pair of <a class="item bad dropped"
href="http://www.sockguy.com/bike-1">Sock Guy wool socks</a> and a pair of
synthetic socks.  Synthetic socks were all I could stand to wear in really hot
weather, though the stench of them after a few hot days was literally
breathtaking.

## Jackets

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/orange-nanoair-cozy.jpg"
       alt="Patagonia Nano-air Hoody">
</div>

The <a class="item good"
href="https://www.patagonia.com/product/mens-nano-air-hoody/84365.html">Patagonia
Nanoair hoody</a> is my all-time favorite insulated jacket. It's highly
breathable, stretchy, and comfortable. In cool weather it blocks the wind enough
to keep me comfortable on a fast descent, and I can leave it on for the next
climb without sweating it through. Its DWR finish holds up well to brief rain
showers. It also feels great to wear to sleep. The Nanoair isn't the most
packable jacket out there, and many other jackets have a better weight to warmth
ratio, but it is very versatile and I've been comfortable even in even
sub-freezing temperatures and heavy precipitation by layering the Nanoair with a
hardshell jacket. I started the trip with the original model of the Nanoair
hoody, but Patagonia replaced it with the 2018 version due to excessive pilling
(and an ultimate death by being chewed up in my cassette). The newer version is
warmer and less breathable than the original, so I would consider the Nanoair
light for more moderate temperatures. I carried a <a class="item neutral
dropped"
href="https://www.patagonia.com/product/mens-down-sweater-vest/84622.html">Patagonia
down vest</a> through Alaska, but hardly ever needed the additional warmth and
dropped it the first chance I got. If we ever expect to encounter extreme cold
temperatures (<10 degrees F), I will pick up a Merino wool baselayer.

We were incredibly lucky with the weather through North America, with only a few
days of rain in 5+ months. Ecuador, however has been a different story, and
rarely a day goes by without a solid drenching. So, the rain jacket I started
the trip with, a <a class="item bad dropped"
href="https://rab.equipment/eu/kinetic-plus-jacket">Rab Kinetic plus
soft-shell,</a> which breathes incredibly well and is very comfortable, has
proven totally inadequate to heavy, extended storms. So, after getting soaked to
the bone a few times, Abby and Julian brought down a <a class="item good new"
href="https://www.outdoorresearch.com/us/en/mens-foray-jacket/p/2680800001008">Outdoor
Research Foray hard-shell jacket</a> to Quito. This jacket has held up well to
heavy rains, and while the material isn't nearly as breathable as the Rab, it
does have full side zippers which essentially turn it into a poncho, so it
ventilates as well as any hard-shell jacket.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/rain-jacket.jpg"
       alt="Outdoor Research Foray Jacket">
</div>

## Rain pants

A light pair of rain pants are important for cold, rainy days. My <a class="item
good new"
href="https://www.patagonia.com/product/mens-torrentshell-rain-pants/83812.html">Patagonia
rain paints</a> are very lightweight and packable. The ankle snaps make it easy
to put them on and off over bike shoes, which you really appreciate during
intermittent thunderstorms. These replaced a similar pair of <span class="item
bad dropped">Columbia pants</span> which split apart at the seams.

## Shoes

Bike tourists vary widely in their choices of footwear while riding. Some opt
for sandals to beat the heat and dry out quickly, others prefer regular athletic
shoes that work just as well off the bike, and some rely on bike specific shoes
and cleats for optimal performance. Since we're spending so many hours on the
bike and covering so many miles every day, I prefer bike specific shoes that are
most efficient for riding. My <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.adidasoutdoor.com/five-ten-kestrel-lace-mens-mountain-bike-shoe/FT18.html">5.10
Kestrel lace mountain bike shoes</a> with SPD cleats are exceptionally stiff
(for efficient pedaling), are easy to walk in off the bike, and strike a good
compromise between breathability and warmth. I've been comfortable wearing them
with a pair of light synthetic socks in 110 degree weather and in freezing rain
with heavy waterproof socks. These replaced <a class="item bad dropped"
href="https://www.chainreactioncycles.com/shimano-xm7-gore-tex-mtb-spd-shoes-2018/rp-prod138015">Shimano
XM7 Gore-Tex bike shoes</a> which I found to be terribly uncomfortable for most
conditions. The Gore-Tex layer means that they donâ€™t breathe at all, so once
your feet get wet they'll stay that way the rest of the day. No matter how
waterproof your shoe material is, you'll still get enough water coming in
through the top to turn your shoe into a swimming pool. Now, your waterproof
shoes just ensure that your swimming pool stays full to the brim. The Shimano
shoes are also way more flexible than I prefer in a cycling shoe. They are also
apparently styled with the assumption that you'll never emerge from the
backcountry.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/dirty-shoes.jpg"
       alt="5.10 Kestrel Lace shoes">
</div>

As any experienced hiker can attest, there are few better feelings than taking
off your boots at the end of the day and slipping into a pair of comfortable
camp shoes. The same is true for bikepacking. I started the trip with a pair of
<a class="item bad dropped"
href="https://xeroshoes.com/shop/gender/mens/ztrail-men/">Xero sandals.</a>
These are very light and packable, but unfortunately the soles are so thin that
every little pebble drives into your foot and even walking on cobblestone is
uncomfortable.  Furthermore, nothing screams dirty bike traveller like wearing
sandals into a nice restaurant. So, in Guadalajara, Mexico, I swapped them out
for <a class="item new good"
href="https://www.nike.com/t/mercurialx-vapor-xii-club-turf-soccer-shoe-VbCc1J">Nike
mercurial lightweight turf shoes</a> which can pass for normal street wear but
are still very light and compressible, and also make it possible for me to join
in pick-up soccer games that we find along the way. They also work well enough
even for aggressive day hikes.

## Gloves

When the temperature drops and the sky opens up, my fingers are the first to
suffer. I started the trip with <a class="item neutral"
href="https://www.castelli-cycling.com/us/men/accessories/gloves/p/451752419P-010">Castelli
neoprene gloves,</a> which operate like Scuba gear and maintain warmth even when
totally soaked. These keep my digits comfortable into the low 50s, and I like
that they don't get clammy from sweat the way a real waterproof glove does.
However, I've found recently that they aren't sufficient when it gets really
cold, and so in Quito I pick up a pair of <a class="item good new"
href="https://www.marmot.com/precip-shell-mitt-17160.html">Marmot waterproof
mitts.</a> So far, they've proven to be totally waterproof and windproof,
keeping me comfortable even when descending in pouring, near-freezing rain. They
have minimal insulation and pack down very small, and could be layered with a
lightweight liner for even colder temperatures. I find that I don't have any
issues shifting or braking with mittens, and appreciate the extra warmth, but
some people might prefer the added dexterity that comes with gloves.

## Accessories

A <a class="item good"
href="https://buffusa.com/shop-buff/men/multifunctional-headwear-category/original-family.html">Buff</a>
is a great thing to have on hand, and has countless uses. On steaming hot days,
it's great to dunk in a stream and put around your neck to cool off and to block
the sun, or to keep sweat out of your eyes. It's a great face mask to block the
wind on a cold descent. I even used it as a bandage to wrap a wound once when
Caitlin wiped out.

I've got an unusually large head, and the <a class="item new good"
href='https://www.patagonia.com/product/duckbill-running-cap/28817.html'>Patagonia
duckbill cap</a> is one of the few hats I've found that fits me comfortably.
It's awesome on a hot day, as its mesh is very light but the fabric bill still
absorbs sweat well. It is wonderful to wear by itself and fits well under a
helmet. The bill is a little longer than a standard cycling cap, so provides
excellent sun protection for your eyes on bright days.


# Camping gear

## Tent

I've used a
<a class="item good" href="https://www.bigagnes.com/Copper-Spur-HV-UL2">Big
  Agnes Copper Spur UL2 tent</a> for the last seven or eight years, and it has
come with me on backpacking and bikepacking trips all over the world, without
failing me once. As we were coming through Canada, the seam tape finally started
to peel off, and one of the door zippers was acting up. Fortunately, we went
right through Steamboat Springs, CO, where Big Agnes is headquartered, and they
generously replaced my old tent with a new one. It is very spacious for an
ultra-light tent, with generous headroom, and large porticos on either side to
keep gear out of the rain. Most of the tent upper is mesh, so on hot nights,
it's great to sleep without the rain-fly and take advantage of cooling breezes.
I do wish, however, that there were less nylon on the bottom of the tent sides,
which blocks the wind. We've slept comfortably in heavy rain and wind without
any issues. The Copper Spur is fairly light at around three pounds, and while
there are lighter tents, especially the popular Cuben fiber single-wall options
from companies like Z-packs and Hyperlite, I prefer the ease of use of a
free-standing tent and the option to sleep without a rain-fly.

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/beach-tent.jpg"
       alt="Big Agnes Copper Spur UL2">
</div>

I have to admit that I used to think that the <a class="item good new"
href="https://www.bigagnes.com/Gear/Tents/mtnGLO">Big Agnes mtnGLO</a>
was silly. Basically, it's a string of LED lights woven into a light piece of
fabric, which you string around your tent for soft light at night. I have always
just relied on my headlight and never saw the need to carry another piece of
gear just to provide light. However, since the folks at Big Agnes headquarters
in Steamboat Springs gave me one of these, I've found it to dramatically improve
the experience of relaxing in the tent at the end of the day. The mtnGLO weighs
less than an ounce, plugs into the USB power bank we're already carrying, and
proves nice, soft light that makes it all the nicer to relax with a book after a
long day on the bike.

## Cooking

<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/stove-flip-small.jpg"
       alt="Cooking on a Whisperlite International stove">
</div>

Caitlin and I love to cook, so inevitably our cooking equipment for this trip
would be a disappointment. Nonetheless, it's wonderful to tuck into a hot bowl
of soup in your tent while a cold rain is pounding outside, so our camp stoves
haven't gone unappreciated. We began the trip with a <a class="item good
dropped" href="https://www.msrgear.com/windburner">MSR Windburner stove,</a>
which is very compact and hard to beat in ease of use and efficiency of boiling
water. However, boiling water is about all it does, which seriously limits your
culinary options. We were often in very remote places in North America, so it
was critical to carry enough food for at least a few meals, which generally
included rolled oats for breakfast, and some mixture of rice, pasta, dried
vegetables, and seasoning for dinner.

The Windburner uses butane gas canisters which are difficult to find outside of
the US, Canada, and Western Europe, so as we entered Mexico, we switched it out
for a <a class="item good new"
href="https://www.msrgear.com/whisperlite-international-2012">Whisperlite
International stove.</a> The Whisperlite International can burn white gas or
unleaded gasoline, or kerosene with a different jet. (There is a
non-international version of the stove which burns only white gas.) Make sure
that you are using the right type of fuel for your stove, otherwise you will end
up with a sooty mess. We made the mistake of using kerosene in Baja California
without the kerosene jet and we're still cleaning off the soot. Since then,
we've been using unleaded gas, which you can fill up at any gas station and
burns fairly cleanly. Industrial alcohol is also pretty easy to find in most big
cities if you prefer an alcohol stove.

We haven't found ourselves cooking very often in Latin America due to the
universal availability of tasty, cheap food, but it's certainly nice to have the
option to make your own hot food. I carry a <span class="item neutral">cheap
lighter</span> to ignite the stove, as well as <span class="item
neutral">matches in a waterproof case</span> as insurance for a worst-case
situation.

While the Whisperlite stove has an integrated 1L pot, we need to carry a <a
class="item neutral new"
href="https://www.rei.com/product/764178/rei-co-op-ti-ware-nonstick-titanium-cookset">REI
titanium pot set</a> for use with the Whisperlite. This 1L pot and pan set are
very light, and makes it possible to attempt slightly more ambitious meals
(frying pancakes, sauteing vegetables, etc). As a cooking instrument and
utensil, I use a <a class="item good"
href="https://seatosummit.com/product/alphalight-long-handled-spoon/">Sea to
Summit titanium spoon.</a>

## Knife

A good knife comes in handy all the time, so I'm glad to have with me a <a
class="item good" href="https://www.benchmade.com/bugout-family.html">Benchmade
Bugout serrated knife</a>. It's simple, sharp, light and durable.

## Sleeping

A good night's rest is one of the most important parts to enjoying your time in
the backcountry, and that's even more true when you're out for weeks on end. To
stay warm and cozy on cold nights, I use a <a class="item good"
href="https://katabaticgear.com/shop/palisade-sleeping-bag/">Katabatic Palisade
30 degree down sleeping bag</a>, which weighs only about a pound and packs down
to nearly a liter, yet still has impressive warmth. The non-standard system for
attaching to your sleeping pad isn't for everyone, but it works for me, and I
appreciate the weight and volume savings from obviating the need for most of the
back of the bag. On particularly cold nights, I'll layer my down bag with a <a
class="item good new"
href="https://seatosummitusa.com/products/premium-silk-travel-liner">Sea to
Summit silk Sleeping bag liner.</a> A sleeping bag liner is also crucial for hot
nights when you can't bear even the thought of down, or for those seedy hotels
whose TripAdvisor reviews don't exactly exclaim the cleanliness of the bedding.

For a sleeping pad, the <a class="item good"
href="https://www.thermarest.com/neoair-xtherm">Thermarest Neoair Xtherm</a>
can't be beat. This inflatable pad is super portable, warm, light, and
comfortable. It's also much less noisy than some other inflatable pads. The only
downside, other than price, is that it's fairly delicate, so it's important to
avoid placing it on sharp sticks, thorns or other things that might puncture it.
I always inflate it using the included inflater, as I found with a previous pad
(replaced because some of the baffles had given out) that breathing too much
warm, humid air into the pad every night was the perfect recipe for all sorts of
undesirable colonies to develop inside.

Finally, I never camp without my <a class="item good" href="">Sea to Summit
inflatable pillow.</a> It packs down very small, and completely eliminates the
stiff neck I always used to wake up with when I would just ball up extra clothes
in a sad imitation of a pillow.

## Water

Requirements for carrying water vary dramatically depending on the climate and
frequency of rivers and streams. When we're riding through wet country with
abundant clean mountain streams, I'll generally not carry more than two liters
of water at a time, and simply filter water along the way, whenever I run out.
On the other hand, I've had to carry as much as twelve liters, on a 120 mile
stretch of the Baja Divide with no supplies, which can be covered in two hot,
long days.

I drink most of my water from a <a class="item good"
href="https://www.platy.com/hydration-systems/hoser">Platypus Hoser 3L hydration
system</a> that I keep in my frame bag and run the hose up between my feed bags,
so that it is easy to access while riding. The design of the Hoser is nice as
the bag unscrews entirely from the hose, so that you can remove the bag from
your bike to fill, while leaving the hose in place. The bag, unfortunately, is
pretty thin, and it did once spring a leak due to it being jammed in my frame
bag with something pointy, requiring a replacement.

When I need more than three liters at a time, I fill up another <a class="item
good new" href="https://hydrapak.com/seeker-26">Hydrapak 3L reservoir.</a> This
is super sturdy construction, has straps for attaching it on the outside of your
bike, and packs down to almost nothing when not in use.

Finally, I carry a <span class="item neutral">700 ml water bottle</span> for extra
water carrying capacity as well as the convenience of having a bottle that you
can spray to clean off your bike or deter aggressive dogs (or to return fire
when ambushed by kids with water balloons; apparently this is a popular pastime
in rural Ecuadorian villages).

For filtration, I use a <a class="item good"
href="https://www.katadyn.com/us/us/31462-8018006-katadyn-befree-1.0L_usa">Katydyn
BeFree 1L water filter,</a> which is very compact, easy to use, and has an
impressive flow rate. The bag is fairly sturdy, though I did have to replace it
once when a seam started to leak. My favorite aspect of this type of filter,
though, is the ability to stop for ten seconds at a creek on the side of the
trail, fill up the filter, and drink directly from it as you ride. When creeks
are everywhere, this is the only water I need to carry. Caitlin is using a
<a class="item bad" href="https://sawyer.com/products/sawyer-squeeze-filter/">Sawyer Squeeze,</a> and we both feel that the BeFree is more convenient as an
integrated system and that the bag is much more robust. Note that this style of
filter (both the BeFree and Sawyer Squeeze) doesn't remove viruses, so you'll
need to use an extra level of purification in areas where that is a concern.


## Light

Though we try to avoid riding after sunset as much as we can, as the combination
of averse lighting conditions and drunk and/or tired drivers definitely
increases the risk to cyclists, it will inevitably happen that you're a few
miles from your destination as the sun dips below the horizon, so it's critical
to be prepared. I'm only carrying a single <a class="item good"
href="https://www.blackdiamondequipment.com/en/headlamps-and-lanterns/revolt-BD620631_cfg.html">Black
Diamond reVolt headlamp,</a> rather than a bike mounted light, which I use both
for riding at night as well as off the bike. The high setting provides just
enough light to comfortably descend a rocky trail at night, and the USB charging
port makes it easy to keep it at full power. It's not nearly as powerful as many
bike lights, but it should be perfectly sufficient if you're not planning to do
a lot of night riding. One downside to riding with a light on your head is that
every bug within a quarter mile will do its best to embed itself in your eyes, ,
so you need to to wear a pair of glasses with good coverage.

I've also got a couple <span class="item neutral">USB rechargeable rear
lights,</span> crucial for making sure you're visible to cars at night.

## Miscellaneous

Sometimes when you're camping and don't feel like immediately going to bed, it's
delightful to build a fire, whether it's for roasting a piece of meat, toasting
smore's, or simply to enjoy the warmth and dance of the flames. I find that
carrying a small bag of dry <span class="item good">cotton balls</span> makes
starting a fire much easier. Perhaps a more proficient fire-maker wouldn't need
this crutch, but with two or three cotton balls pulled apart to maximize their
burning time, I can reliably get a fire started, even without ideal kindling.

I have often heard the joke that Alaska's state bird is the mosquito, but always
assumed that it exaggerated their severity. Since riding through the North
Slope of the Brooks Range, I can confirm that this is not the case, and I owe
Caitlin's mom, Loreen, endless appreciation for her insistence that we bring <a
class="item good"
href="https://seatosummit.com/product/nano-mosquito-headnet/">Sea to Summit
mosquito head nets.</a> I would immediately reach for my head net every time I
came to a stop in Alaska, in the roughly five seconds before being covered head
to toe with the ruthless bloodsuckers. I even bought a replacement head net
after donating mine to a cyclist heading north out of Fairbanks who had
naively decided he could survive without it. It might be an indication of a
latent Alaskan trauma that I still derive great comfort from carrying a head
net, despite not needing to take it out of my bag for many thousands of miles.
The tiny size is well worth the peace of mind.

I don't use my <a class="item neutral" href="http://thetentlab.com/Deuce/DeuceofSpadespage.html">TheTentLab Deuce #2 trowel</a> often, but
sometimes you just need a hole in the ground this instant, and in those cases it
pays to have the proper tool. To be honest, I could probably get by without it
and just use whatever is on hand for excavation, but I worry that that would
only invite disaster.

And, don't forget your <span class="item neutral">toothbrush</span> (sawed in
half, obviously)!
<div>
  <img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/gear-review/toothbrush.jpg"
       alt="Half of a toothbrush">
</div>
